Title
=====

Message Threading v Security:
Why Quoted Text in PGP Email Replies Should Be Off by Default

Abstract
========

We show that including quoted text in encrypted emails' replies presents 
a privacy hazard under certain attack scenarios. However, quoted text is 
not required by any specification, and fortunately the UX advantages 
that it presents (keeping track of conversations) are easily replicated 
using an at-rest approach (well-tested in gmail's "conversation view"), 
without the detriment to security. We therefore recommend making "quoted 
text" off by default in email clients' PGP mode.

Attack Scenario
===============

Two endpoints are in regular email communication using PGP. Alice is 
extra paranoid and secures her private key well. Bob, however, is less 
careful, and Eve steals his. It is a quick operation: To avoid later 
detection, Eve leaves no malware on Bob's endpoint to phone home the 
plaintext of his outgoing mails. However, she controls the network and 
intercepts traffic in transit. She is now able to decrypt all A->B 
messages but not B->A traffic (though she can spoof it).

Ironically, when Bob's key is revealed, Alice is the one who loses 
privacy. It would seem that half the information is still safe, except 
that unfortunately, the current convention for email clients is to keep 
a copy of the previous email ("quoted text") in each reply. This opens 
the rest of the messages to observation by a passive attacker granted 
only one side's key.

There are a number of widely deployed email clients supporting PGP, and 
it is unreasonable to expect that everyone who runs such a client is a 
security expert. Some instances will be running on improperly 
administered computers, and improper operational security practices 
will, doubtless, be employed. Some keys will inevitably leak. The fewer 
people whose privacy is compromised, the better.

Fortunately, this damage can be partially mitigated with only a slight 
change of convention.

Mitigation
==========

The original purpose of quoted text was to aid in keeping track of 
conversations. This is no longer necessary: As gmail demonstrated early 
in its development, the same UX can be achieved if the mail client 
automatically displays all emails of a conversation thread on a single 
page, in a format that mimics the quoted text structure.

Interestingly, in deference to tradition, gmail still includes quoted 
text by default, but hides it because in this system it is clearly 
redundant. In combination with the security considerations, this would 
suggest it's time for a change.

Plus, regardless of privacy, a client shouldn't be storing and 
transmitting redundant copies of data.

Technical Details
=================

Mail clients that thread messages can use the In-Reply-To or 
References headers. JWZ provides an excellent treatment here:
http://www.jwz.org/doc/threading.html

This is, however, metadata, which one may not want to leak. Since 
these headers' specifications are very loose, the headers can actually 
be left blank. Instead, a similar identifier can be encrypted inside a 
PGP block, as part of a custom encrypted header. This hides conversation 
structure from a passive network-controlling attacker.

Conclusion
==========

When used with PGP email, quoted text increases the amount of 
information retrieved by a passive attacker following a single key 
compromise. We therefore recommend that quoted text should be off by 
default in PGP mode (opt-in). We suggest leveraging proper minimalistic 
threading technique instead, for keeping track of conversation flow 
(either using existing headers or devising new encrypted ones).
